Stella Jones investigates the dark side of sport and exercise for readers, The accepted wisdom is that we citizens of the modern world don't get enough exercise. We lead largely sedentary lives where we sit down at work and rarely walk anywhere. That's why health authorities and the sports and lifestyle gurus all insist we need to get up, get out, get moving and do some sport or exercise. But is there any chance that the couch potatoes among us are better off than we imagined? Could it be that it's the healthier lifestyle?
Well, that might be pushing it a bit. But there's definitely a case for arguing that sport and exercise can be bad for you too. Some of you must be a bit sceptical about these claims, so let's have a closer look at them. Then we can decide if the benefits outweigh the damage exercise can do, or not.
I've done some research on behalf of our readers to investigate how sport can be bad for you. I've looked into injury, deaths and long-term conditions that can be caused by sports
The statistics on injury are quite an eye-opener. In Britain, over 13 million people a year receive some kind of injury from doing sport or exercise. The sport that causes the most is football. But just about any sport or exercise can lead to injury. Most injuries tend to be muscle strains and sprains from over-exertion or poor preparation. While, on the whole, most sports injuries tend to be quite minor, a significant number can be quite serious. The most sever are multiple fractures and head injuries. These are often caused by such sports as diving, cycling or skiing. Also, over 11 per cent of traumatic spinal injuries, which can lead to paralysis, are the result of a sports injury.
Apart from one-off injuries from sport, there is also the chance that sports enthusiasts will end up with a long-term condition. These are mainly likely to affect professional sports people. Because they play sport at such a high level, they are the ones liable to get a repetitive strain injury (RSI) or do permanent damage to knees or shoulders. For people who do recreational sports, these types of long-term injuries are far less likely. Though people who do endurance sports such as long-distance running or cycling as a hobby are also at risk.
Bad as any kind of injury is, the worst case scenario is, of course, death. The most dangerous sport in this respect is base jumping. Thankfully, this isn't a mainstream sport and only a relatively small number of people do it.  Of the more popular sports that can be deadly, cycling and swimming are the ones most likely to lead to a fatality. This all makes sport sound pretty scary. But the truth is that the risk of dying from any sport, apart from base jumping, is very low indeed.
Looking at all the data from the comfort of my couch, I have come to the conclusion that doing a sport or exercise can sometimes be a little dangerous. Accidents can happen and people often sprain a wrist or ankle. But the risk of serious injury or death is too small to even think about. Far more worrying is the effexts of doing no exercise at all.  This can lead to obesity, heart disease and other serious diseases such as diabetes. Being too much of a coach potato is unhealthy. We all need to do some exercise to be fit and feel good. The key word is moderation.
